L35 Both reviewers were clearly skeptical that this paper had anything
to do with climate change per se.  Climate adaptation, yes
(ultimately), because this adds the first temperate genomes to the
overall set of sequenced ant genomes.  But climate change, no.  Yet
the first two paragraphs are still entirely devoted to climate change.

Response: The motivation for the study was climate change and the
ultimate goal is to predict responses of ants and ecosystems to
climate change. I do see that we can not make hard conclusions about
climate change because of the confoudned nature of the data. In
response to the reviewers and edits from people in the group, I have
edited to make the narrative clearer that these genomes and this paper
are intended to serve as indicators of responses to environmental
change, including the various impacts of climate change.

L60 This shows genomes by country, not by climate zone or genera.

Response: Ah, yes, I moved the figure reference.

L75 The relationship is not about variation per se (ie the variation
does not change across climates).  Particular characteristics might.
It would be better to move the genome /climate hypotheses up earlier
to lay out the basis for your analyses rather than back-loading them
after the objectives.

Response: I've added some text to clarify variation among genomes
rather than a comparison of genome variability, such as comparing the
variance estimates. I haven't moved the hypotheses, as the reviewers
specifically asked for a reduction in the emphasis of these
hypotheses. So, I have left them in the final intro paragraph, and
move succinctly through their development. As you'll see in a future
response, I have moved some text from the discussion back to the intro
that sets of the genome size hypothesis better. 

L77 This is just about climate, no genomes included in here.  Yet the
second sentence makes genomic predictions.  Unclear.

Response: I have added a bit more text here and a reference to the
Geographic Mosaic Hypothesis.

L81 The hypothesis is that patterns will exist?  That is very very
vague.  Is there no literature on climate effects on either of these
genomic characteristics at all?  Do genomes generally get smaller or
larger with temperature or some other env variable?  Would one really
expect convergence in genomic similarity on the basis of habitat?
Why?  This sounds like fishing for anything that comes out with no
biological basis for any prediction.  Reviewer 1 specifically asked
for background to justify these analyses.

Response: I have moved text from the discussion back to the intro to
address this. There is now more literature developing this
hypothesis. 

L85 Doesn't this sentence confound phylogeny and climate?

Response: Yes, this is an acknowledgment of this. See my response
below about MASH similarity and phylogenetics. 

L153 Reviewer 3 critiques total bp length as a measure of genome size,
and suggested something else (using GenomeScope) instead.  I see no
evidence you have done this.  Can you defend your decision to retain
this measure?

Response: The reviewer suggested using it because it "tends to be more
accurate than assembly size". Other than that, the reviewer provided
to justification, citations or otherwise. My approach in drafting my
response to the reviewer is that: 

Genome scope is intended for "unassembled short reads", and we are
working with assembled genomes. Also, I have added text to the methods
discussing both the use of genome size estimates (e.g. flow cytometry)
as targets for assembly size, which should produce a correlation
between true genome size and assembly size. As a way to examine this
with the data in hand, I tested for a correlation between ant assembly
size and flow cytometry estimates for ant genera that were present in
both NCBI and the Tsutsui 2008 study. The correlation is relatively
high r = 0.57 and marginally significant (p-value = 0.07), which
suggests that such a relationship between genome size and assembly
size exists for the ant genomes. 

L158 The third reviewer critiqued your decision to use sampling
location info instead of some sort of range-wide center or range for
these species.  Can you defend the decision you have made?

Response: Yes, see my response to the reviewer. In short, I conducted
both analyses, but eventually chose site location, as it is the best
indicator of the genome of the sequence that is in hand. 

??? Add to response letter.

L161 MASH similarity is a proxy for phylogeny.  Why not use it to
control for phylogeny and test effects on genome size in a
phylogenetically controlled way, as the reviewers want?  You don't
actually expect climate to directly affect genome similarity at the
sequence level, except in its covariance with phylogeny (ie clades
move across space in a biogeographically cohesive way).  Use it as a
predictor instead.  I suspect it will eliminate your environmental
effect, but that is the essence of the analytical problem here.  You
have added a bunch of highly phylogenetically correlated
samples. Presenting a weak, uncontrolled analysis in order to have
something significant to report is not really that helpful.

Response: I understand MASH as a whole genome distance metric, which
can be used to construct phylogenys. Here, I've used it get a measure
of similiarity among the ant genomes. This might be what you're saying
here, and I would clarify that thinking of phylogeny as the history of
the development of a genome means that all evloutionary forces have
contributed here, including selective forces. I agree that we can't
parse out climate responses from all of the other forces that may be
resulting in similarities from species which are more related to each
other. I see this primarily as a matter of being careful about
interpretations drawn from the results as presented. I think that as I
have responded to your comments, this is now clearer in the text. 

L189 The third reviewer suggested looking only at Aphaenogaster.  I do
not see that you have done so.

Response: I had done this, and the results were included in previous
drafts; however, they were switched in favor of the current results in
order to have more statistical power, which as a comment of a few
people, but was definitely a comment from Nick who has significant
stats experience. 

??? Add to response letter.

L210 You need to remove this stuff.  The reviewers did not buy it.

Response: I have removed the final sentence and replaced it with a
more reserved statement about the relevance of our findings to the
hypotheses.

L212 This is a much more relevant frame.  You can speculate at the
very end that understanding climate adaptation at the genomic level
can provide insights for prospective changes under climate change, but
that's a step farther removed from where you are now.


L213 now you have returned to climate change, but you should be
focusing on climate adaptation across ants.  What is known about
climate adaptation in ants in extreme environments?  Variation in
freeze-tolerance?  What characteristics to the currently sequenced
species possess, and how are Aphaenogaster different?

Response: I'll add the climate adapation language to the text, which
I think will help to strengthen the narrative, and make it clear that
although we are not studying climate change impacts, we are looking
toward the potential impacts of climate change. 


L216 It is not strong, because it is confounded.

Response: I changed the wording here from strong to largest to avoid
the confusion between the observed statistics and the largest scale
inference regarding the hypotheses, which is where the potential for
confounded variables enters. I have tried throughout to describe the
results in terms of the support or non-support for the
hypotheses. My perspective here is that although we have not
conducted a controlled study of these hypotheses, the information we
have is not useless and can inform inference.

L222 Oh - why was this not in the introduction?  This is what your
reviewers were looking for - an a priori reason to expect genome size
might change in a particular way in response to these variables.

Response: This setup was in the intro, but two of the reviewers
requested that the intro be reduced, especially setup and discussion
of the biogeographic context (primarily Yannick's comment). I moved
it, along with other text to the discussion in order to address
this. I've moved it back to the intro and placed it with the setup for
the size hypothesis.
