Thank you to the editor and reviewers, whose comments were
constructive and contributed to the improvement of the manuscript. We
have addressed all points (see "RESPONSE" and referenced line
numbers).

Reviewer 1 (Anonymous)
Basic reporting

The article is generally well prepared, though see comments below
regarding climate variables and the abbreviations. Figure are
generally crisp / easy to read (save vectors in Figure 6).

A few areas that require attention include:

(1) I think the manuscript could be improved through the addition of
more background / context regarding the relationship(s) between
climate adaptation, genome size, and response to climatic change.

Given the exploratory nature of the study, perhaps it is not possible
to develop predictions / testable hypotheses, but it was unclear to me
how / why relationships between genome size and climate gradients
would be indicative of ant responses to climate change. In think this
is especially important given that the authors were apparently not
able to control for phylogenetic relatedness (which they acknowledge
and discuss).

The title makes a link between 'ecological genomics' and 'responses to
climate change', but that's not really what this paper is
doing. Instead, the study involves correlating aspects of the genome
with climate variables, finding some significant relationships, and
then claiming that these relationships are somehow informative (or at
least warrant consideration) of climate change responses. However,
without a clear, mechanistic linkage between climate, genome size, and
climate adaptation, I could not follow how these biogeographical
relationships say anything about climate change responses.

I think it is enough to report these relationships and speculate some
in the Discussion as the what they might mean, but as written, I do
not feel the title reflects the study or its findings.

RESPONSE: We have added more background linking to climate adapation,
genome size and responses to climate (see lines 57-65). Clarified that
climate change is the motivation and climate adapation is the
basis. We have also added an updated analysis that now includes MASH
genomic similarity as a control for phylogenetic relatedness (see
lines 150-152 and 176-181). Title has now been changed to more closely
reflect the results presented with the removal of climate change and
ecological genomics in favor of the more focused results now presented
in the text.

(2) At times the writing was vague and wandering, particularly in the
Introduction. A good example is L69-70, which states "...phylogenetics
is a factor determining the response of ant species to climatic
change...". It was unclear to this reader how / why "phylogenetics"
would "determine" a response to climatic change.

The Introduction also reads a bit like a laundry list of reasons
justifying what it is important to sequences the genomes of ants and
Aphaenogaster in particular. In my opinion, a lot of this wasted
space. I think it is enough to say ants are important generally,
Aphaenogaster is something the authors have studied and so have some
insights and get on with a discussion about genomics and climate
adaptation - either broadly or in ants specifically to the extent that
is possible.

RESPONSE: Ecological background on Aphaenogaster reduced in the
introduction and discussion of the biogeographic patterns has been
moved to the Discussion section (e.g. lines 234-250), and overall we
have edited to make the text more focused and language regarding
climate have been clarified to address adaptations to climate
(e.g. lines 55-65 and 75-83) with climate change as a motivating
context for the study, not a direct subject of study.

(3) A few minor points: 

L168-170 - Check grammar / missing word.

RESPONSE: Grammar checked throughout and fixed (see lines 168-170)

Figure 1 - Not sure this one is necessary.

RESPONSE: As the reviewer was not sure about this, we have chosen to
include it as it graphically illustrates the current state of whole
genome sequencing efforts in ants.

Figure 6 (vectors and associated labels need to be much darker to be visible). 

RESPONSE: This figure has been removed. 

There is some minor confusion regarding which climate variables /
datasets were used when. For example- Table 2 - PRISM data are
reported here, but worldclim is used in the analyses - any reason for
different datasets?

RESPONSE: We have updated the results to use WorldClim for all samples
(see Table 1).

L178 - Annual minimum temperature and annual maximum temperature are
not among the 19 standard bioclim variables from WordClim - are these
custom or referring to BIO5/6 (which are month not annual)?

RESPONSE: These were referring to the BioClim Min Temperature of the
Coldest Month and Maximum Temperature of the Warmest Month. We have
updated both of these in the text (see lines 171-173).

Experimental design

As mentioned above, I think the manuscript would benefit if
predictions or research questions were more clearly articulated and
supported in the Introduction. While two hypotheses are mentioned in
the final paragraph of the Introduction, they tended to be vague or
poorly worded.

For example: "...to test the hypothesis that climate variables shape
the distribution of ant genomes, we explored the correlation between
spatial and multi-decadal climate variables". First, what is the
distribution of an ant genome? And second, it reads as if the
correlation of interest is between "spatial and multi-decadal climate
variables" - in other words, between two kinds of climate variables,
not between a set of climate variables and some aspect of ant genomes.

Otherwise, the methods are well described and the statistical analyses
seem well executed.

RESPONSE: Similar to our response to the previous comments with regard
to clarity and focus, we have edited the dicussion to re-organize the
development of the exploratory analysis more clearly. We have also
simplified by focusing on genome size, rather than genome size and
similarity. This has streamlined the introduction and has improved the
clarity of the conceptual development. 

Validity of the findings

I will echo my comments above regarding the failure to clearly
articulate the linkages between climate gradients, genome attributes
(size, similarity), and responses to climate change.

While the data seem robust (I cannot comment on the sequencing /
bioinformatics) and the analyses sound, and while the authors
acknowledge the importance of other factors ignored (for now) in the
analyses (such as phylogenetic correlations), I do feel that, given
the sample size, the data and results are somewhat limited in what
they can tell use about climate adaptation / responses in this group
of ants. It certainly is great to have and report these new sequences,
which will add to a growing body of sequence data for ants, I just
caution against over-interpretation / speculation given the small
sample size and uncertainty.

RESPONSE: We have now attempted to control for phylogenetic
similarity, in addition to spatial autocorrelation. We have also added
text that presents important caveats and discusses the results in the
context of potential issues with the sample size and the potential
influence of variables that were not statistically controlled. See
Discussion section lines 253-264.

Reviewer 2 (Yannick Wurm)

Basic reporting
no comment

Experimental design
no comment

Validity of the findings
no comment

Comments for the Author

Title: Expanded view of the ecological genomics of ant responses to climate change

The authors have produced draft sequences for the genomes of six
species of ants in the genus Aphaenogaster collected from eastern
North America. There is high value in these ant genome sequences: ants
in this genus are models for studies of ecology and behavior (>300
papers with Aphaenogaster in the title), no sequence from this genus
had to date been reported, these six new genomes increase the number
of ants with sequenced genomes by ~25%.

The methods for genome sequencing and analysis are sound and the
writing style and quality are appropriate (see minor issues
below). The new ant genome sequences could represent a publication on
their own, even without much analysis. The authors perform superficial
comparisons of the genome sequences: showing higher similarities
between genomes of species in the same genus than between genuses, as
well distinct separation from genera compared with others previously
published ant genomes in the formicoid subfamily. Intriguingly, the
data also support the polyphyly of A. rudis as described in recent
literature, though this evidence is based on a sample size of
n=2. Together, these data would be sufficient for publicaiton in
peerj.

However, the manuscript is framed within the context of using ants as
indicator taxa for environmental disturbance and climatic
variation. Specifically, the authors suggest that ecological variables
should influence ant genomic signatures. They propose that (i) ants
found within similar ecological conditions should have more similar
genomes; and that (ii) genome size should similarly correspond to
biogeographic patterns. These hypotheses are original and would be
very interesting if proven (stronger datasets to test such hypotheses
may exist in mammals). Unfortunately, neither hypothesis is very well
substantiated and the supporting data is rather tenuous because the
authors (i) lack power (a small number of species for a relatively
high number of examined environmental variables) and (ii) do not
control for phylogeny. We note that additionally there is little
consideration of possible variation within species.


Furthermore, the title evokes responses to climate change - which
implicitly suggests temperature manipulation experiments - but this is
quite far from the paper.

This is somewhat frustrating given that the senior author has a strong
track record of rigorous work. Controlling for phylogeny/ would make
the climatic/biogeographical analysis much stronger, although we note
that 21 of the 25 ant species used come from the Americas thus
potentially creating a bias. A rigorous analysis of the proposed
hypotheses would likely require much additional data generation that
is likely beyond the scope of this paper.

We recommend that the authors: 

- Move the biogeographic/climatic analysis from results to
  discussion. And shorten it substantially in the main text (this
  could involve moving some aspects to supplementary).

RESPONSE: We have removed much of the biogeographic analysis from the
text. This was done in part as a result of using the genome similarity
as a means to control for phylogenetic relatedness, but it also
allowed us to focus the text and clarify the motivation for the
biogeographic analysis of genome size (see 58-65). Introduction text
on the biogeographic context has been reduced (e.g. lines 71-74 and
75-83) and moved to the Discussion (e.g. lines 236-252)

- Make it clear that the manuscript mainly reports a powerful new
  phylogenomic resource for an important ant genus

RESPONSE: We have added text to the abstract, introduction and
conclusion pointing to the importance of these genomes as a resource
for future studies of ant genomics (see Lines 35-36, 82-84 and
267-271).

- Change the title and abstract (and other parts) of the manuscript to
  focus on the resource and dramatically tone down interpretations
  linked to ecology or effects of climate change.

RESPONSE: We have now removed climate change from the title and
re-organized the introduction to clarify that climate change is a
motivation for the study but we did not directly examine the impacts
of climate change. We have also added important cautionary text on
statistical power and potential uncontrolled variables. With the new
analysis controlling for phylogenetics we have also reduced and
focused the biogeographic analysis, including the removal of genome
similarity statistics (see Table 4) and biogeographic ordination and
vector analyses have been removed.

We expect that this would only represent a small amount of work. 

With kind regards,

Gino Brignoli & Yannick Wurm

Minor comments

L118: which version of BLAST? What was approach used to remove
      contaminants, chimeric sequences etc (software, parameters etc)
L128/129: which NCBI sequence database? NR? Which blast algorithm? Blastx? blastn?

RESPONSE: Details added (see lines 67, 97, 110)

L52 “...social structure and community assembly” - missing u

RESPONSE: Fixed, see lines 53.
 
L89 “With the these new…” - remove “the”

RESPONSE: Fixed, see line 207. 

L94: "demonstrated patterns in the evolutionary dynamics of ant genome
      size (Tsutsui et al., 2008) " - I think the authors simply mean
      to say that there was variation in genome size.

RESPONSE: This sentence has been removed. 

L113: Anophales -> Anopheles

RESPONSE: Fixed, see line 94. 

L118 "blast" is lowercase - while subsequent page it is uppercase L128

RESPONSE: BLAST is now uppercase except when referring to the
functions used, see lines 97 and 109.

L128: using -> Using

RESPONSE: Fixed, see line 109. 

L130: the -> The. similar capitalization issues in Fig 3 legend and elsewehre

RESPONSE: Fixed, e.g. see Figure 3 legend. 

L133: I don't understand what "recommended for gene coverage" means?

RESPONSE: This sentence has been removed in edits. 

L189 to 191 - were all 26 ant species used for all analyses? If so
       which collection locations were used for previously published
       genomes?  (Such information may unfortunately be absent from
       previously published genomes)

RESPONSE: This has been clarified, see lines 153-157. 

Pg13 “Figure 6. Plot an showing…” - remove “an”

RESPONSE: This figure has been removed. 

L249 “from from previous experimental…” 

RESPONSE: Fixed, see lines 271-272. 

Table 1 can be supplementary

RESPONSE: We have left Table 1 in the main text as it is primary
information for the Aphaenogaster genomes sequenced that risks being
lost or more difficult to obtain if made part of the supplementary
materials. 

L123: "Genome Quality:" -> usually the CEGMA (or BUSCO) metrics are
        used as biological measures of genome completeness.

RESPONSE: CEGMA has been discontinued and the authors recommended
using alternative tools. BUSCO is available, however, at present we
have not completed the genome annotation process, which appears to be
a requirement. 

L126: what does "70% of fragments mapped " mean? Fragments of what? Mapped from where to where?

RESPONSE: We have clarified this results, see line 107.

Ref "The evolution of genome size in ants. " - should only have 4
      authors but has about 20x more!

RESPONSE: We have not changed this, as we are using the bibtex cls
file that was provided. Please let us know if there is a different
formatting file that we should use. 

The two rudis colonies do not cluster together according to
whole-genome MASH. I understand the authors dont want to do fullgenome
comparisons here - however does e.g., a mitochondrial or nuclear
“housekeeping” gene phylogeny based on sequences from these sample
support the polyphyly?

RESPONSE: This is an interesting question that we did not examine but
will consider doing in future analyses. 

Reviewer 3 (Anonymous)

Basic reporting
no comment

Experimental design

Major comments:

There are a few issues with the main analysis correlating
environmental variables with genomic characteristics:

1. The total length of assemblies is not a good metric for genome
size. While flow cytometry is ideal, k-mer analysis (e.g. GenomeScope)
also tends to be more accurate than assembly size so should be used
instead.

RESPONSE: Although not ideal, assembly size is an estimate of genome
size. We looked into using GenomeScope; however, it appears to be for
short read sequences not assemblies. We have added new cautionary
discussion text (see lines 253-264), methods text (see lines 158-163)
and results to support the utility of using assembly size as an
indicator of genome size (see lines 163-165).

2. The authors note that they did not perform phylogenetic correction
for their analyses (line 237) but seem to acknowledge that it would be
a more appropriate approach. I would argue that such a correction is
essential. The conclusion that climate influences genomic
characteristics is completely dependent on this analysis.

RESPONSE: Based on Reviewer 2 comments, the conclusiveness of the
biogeoggraphic analysis has been reduced. We have also introduced a
new analysis that attempts to control for phylogenetic relatedness in
addition to spatial autocorrelation (lines 150-152 and 176-181). This
has allowed us to both streamline the development and reduce the
emphasis of the biogeographic results in the Introduction by removing
the genome similarity results and focusing on genome size (see lines
58-65 and 75-83).

3. It appears that the latitude and longitude of collecting site were
used for correlational analyses. However, given that this study is
comparative in nature, each individual genome is meant to represent an
entire species. And several of these species have very large ranges
that span the entire eastern United States into Canada making these
data points inappropriate for this analysis. The midpoint of the
species ranges could be a reasonable alternative. Unless the authors
are arguing that these six specimens that they have used are
effectively a single population but I don’t believe that this is the
case. While there appears to be some undiscovered species diversity
within A. rudis, the rest appear to be good species without gene flow
between them.

RESPONSE: We conducted an analysis using the species range midpoints;
however, we decided against this given that range predictions could
potentially introduce inaccuracies due to incomplete or inaccurate
sampling of ants. Each way has it's issues, and for similicity we have
chosen to focus on the observed collection locations. We acknowledge
that this is imperfect, and in the interest of tempering the
conclusions drawn from the study, we have added text regarding the
limitations of the sample size and some discussion of the nature of
ant genomes, including the potential for rapid evolution via genome
duplication as discussed in the most recent large-scale flow cell
based ant genome size study (see lines 62-65).

4. The previously sequenced ant genomes included in the analysis were
sequenced using a variety of different methods. For example, some
genomes included 454 sequencing. This could bias the size of the
genome assembled. Perhaps some of these influences could be taken into
account.

RESPONSE: This is a valid point. We have included text pointing this
out as a potential confoudning variable that should be controlled for
in future studies (see lines 259-261).

5. The authors perform their analyses both by including Aphaenogaster
genomes and again without these new genomes. However, a third analysis
that focuses just on Aphaenogaster might be more compelling. This
would eliminate some of the phylogenetic bias in the data and also
eliminates many of the other factors that could be playing a role as
all Aphaenogaster genomes were collected and assembled in the same
way. I also wonder if leaving out the fungus-growing ants, a group
that is also over-represented, could have a similar effect. Relatedly,
the fact that Aphaenogaster has such an impact on the analyses seems
to suggest that phylogeny is playing a significant role.

RESPONSE: This is an good observation, and we had initially
constructed the analysis with only the Aphaenogaster species. We
switched to this perspective, largely due to issues of power (as has
been pointed out by other reviewers). With regard to phylogeny, as
stated above, we have now attempted to control for phylogeny using the
MASH genomic similarity matrix in our partial Mantel tests (see lines
150-152 and 176-181).

Other comments:

- More detail is needed for the DNA extraction procedure. Was it
  really necessary to collect DNA from a whole colony? Is there
  polygyny or multiple-mating in these species that could affect the
  assembly? Reporting heterozygosity/genetic diversity would be useful
  and these data could be used to infer colony structure if it is not
  already known.

RESPONSE: Whole colonoies were used in order to have sufficient
concentrations of DNA for sequencing. The method used was explicitely
developed for whole colony sequencing of a colonial mosquito species
(see lines 92-95). The more pressing issue for assembly was
contamination from non-target organisms, this was addressed with
sequence cleaning procedure (see lines 96-99). We did not examine
colony structure yet, but are certainly considering this for future
work.

- While genome annotation is certainly a significant additional
  challenge, comparing gene sets across species could provide
  additional insight. This can now be relatively easily accomplished
  with pipelines like BRAKER which don’t necessarily require
  transcript data to run.

RESPONSE: This is a great suggestion. We are exploring this option for
the next stages of analysis as we would like to make these sequences
available to the general public. 

- Line 128: That is not the average genome size of those listed in the
  table

RESPONSE: Yes, this is now in both the abstract and the main text (see
lines 29 and 109).

- Line 128-130: Why was this BLAST analysis done?

RESPONSE: The BLAST analysis was used primarily to identify
contaminant sequences, but it was also used to match contigs to other
sequences in NCBI's sequence database (see line 96-99 and 109-112).

Validity of the findings
no comment

Comments for the Author

This study by Lau and colleagues presents the newly sequenced genomes
of six species of ants in the genus Aphaenogaster. Given their
worldwide abundance and ecological importance, the genomes of these
species are likely to be of substantial scientific use. There are
relatively few taxonomic groups, particularly within ants, where
multiple closely related species have been de novo sequenced, making
this a potentially valuable resource for studying both ants and genome
evolution.

RESPONSE: Thank you for the constructive comments. 





